---
image: debby-hudson-bb8_zSReIF0-unsplash.jpg
image_license: Photo by Debby Hudson on <a href="https://unsplash.com/photos/bb8_zSReIF0">Unsplash</a>
title: 'Community Health'
description: A blog post about how to keep your community healthy and in balance
---

The open-source model has taken over the software development world. More and
more people come together to produce software, hardware, data or art in a
decentralized and collaborative fashion. The benefits of open source are clear:
It advances autonomy, mastery, purpose and equality. But as often in life: There
are two sides to the coin.

One of the harder parts of open source is *keeping* people together in a healthy
fashion. That part is less clear, less obvious, less discussed and written
about. Let's talk about Open Source Community health.

<div id="more"></div>

But before we start let's make something clear.

## Trigger Warning

Talk of abuse, burnout and conflict ahead. Prepare yourself emotionally before
proceeding. If you believe that reading about this will traumatize you further,
please forgo it. There are only generalized solutions proposed that will **not**
help you to get out of situations you are already in, sorry.

## Open Source Community?

What exactly are we talking about when we say "Open Source Community"?

The following distinction is important for the part of the audience that is not
yet involved with open source.

There is a notion of a *global* open source community that encompasses
*everybody* on the 7 continents, that is somehow involved with working with the
open source way. That is usually what the public, businesses and the media talk
about when they say "Open Source Community".

When people that are part of this global "Open Source Community" talk about
"Open Source Community" they mean the "organization" formed by **specific
people** around a **specific project**. Involved people see the trees,
un-involved people see the forest.

So from here on out if we talk about "Open Source Community" we talk about
individual communities, not the sum of all people doing open source.

## Problems

Alright now that we got that out of the way, what's so hard about *keeping* open
source people together in a healthy fashion? They all are here voluntarily
and out of altruistic reasons right? Everything should be peachy.

What are the problems people face? Unsurprisingly they have a lot in
common with general problems in society.

### Abuse

Open Source Communities are pretty public spaces, mostly online. All the nasty
things people do to each other you'll also find in open source communities.
Entitled attitudes, neglect, insults, racism, sexism, ableism, stalking,
tribalism, conspiracy theory, shit storms etc. Whatever horror you heard of, it
also happens in Open Source Communities.

<div class="img">
  {% asset 'posts/health-richard-twitter.png' alt='@sysrich talking about "armchair quarterbacks who wonâ€™t lift a finger to help' %}
</div>

<div class="img">
  {% asset 'posts/health-josh-twitter.png' alt='@JoshStrobl getting abused via email' %}
</div>

<div class="img">
  {% asset 'posts/health-tobie-twitter.png' alt='@tobie making fun of "reply guys"' %}
</div>

### Organizational Conflict

Open Source Communities are self-forming, loosely coupled, leader- and "lawless"
associations of people. They strive on consensus, friendship and acting in good
faith. But as we all know, relationships turn sour sometimes. Opposing
interests, scarcity of resources, an inappropriate word at the wrong time,
misunderstandings, vivid disagreements, misguided assumptions and expectations.
Wherever there are people together, this is bound to happen.

Unsurprisingly Open source communities are no different. Organizational conflict
is what happens if a group fails to resolve those issues in a satisfactory
fashion for everyone involved.

And because of the egalitarian nature of Open Source Projects, organizational
conflicts are among equals invested in each other. They tend to be hard to
manage as everyone is under great threat of "loosing face". After all, people
cared enough about each others opinion to build something together. Conflict
with some random person on the street seldomly runs deep, but conflict with a
companion? Not so nice.

Another aspect that makes them particular complicated is that Open Source
Communities are *always* about creative manufacturing. Often this means years of
sustained personal investment into a public piece of engineering/art, product
and "brand". Something people can't walk away from so easily.

### Burnout

Working together with a diverse set of people in a collaborative fashion is most
often a nice, refreshing experience but at time working on something
complex also means stress.

Expectations set by yourself or others that you have to meet. Scarcity of
resources. Sudden changes to the course or outside circumstance. Cascading
failures. Abuse and organizational conflict.

As with any other source of stress, people can feel overwhelmed, drained and
unable to meet demands. *Continuous* stress can make people in an Open Source
Community feel help/hopeless and resentful towards it. Eventually they may feel
like they have nothing more to give to it.

Burnout is exhaustion about constant stress.

## Causes

So what are the usual causes for abuse, conflict and burnout for the people
involved in Open Source Communities?

### Lack of Inclusion

Uniformity in our communities is often the result of societal privilege. It
takes a certain amount of freedom from existential and domestic work to have the
mindset, opportunity and time to contribute to an Open Source Community. This is
not only in itself a shortcoming people set out to change, it's *also* a
risk/crisis management issue.

Disagreements turn easier into conflicts if a group of people usually does not
*need* to incorporate different views from the start. It takes practice to
resolve people being at odds with each other. Knowledge and practice of abuse
coping mechanisms are not widely spread among people of the "usual"
majority who suffer less from it.

### Lack of Peer Support

As most other groups of people in society, Open Source Communities often lack
*any* organized strategy for peer support. What can I do when I'm abused? What
can I do if I see someone getting abused? What should I do if someone tells me
about abuse? Who can I talk to in case of continuous stress and looming burnout?

### Lack of Conflict Management

Conflict is part of the deal, yet most Open Source Communities lack *any*
organized strategy for limiting the negative aspects of conflict while
increasing the positive aspects of it.

What can I do if I need counseling? What can I do if conflict turned so bad that
I need conciliation or mediation? What do I have to do to drive, after the
conflict happened, a restorative process in my Open Source Community?

### Lack of proximity

The decentralized fashion in which Open Source Communities work make it
indefinitely harder to pick up on the struggles your peers might go through.
Every challenge that manifested itself for people that have been pushed into
remote work during this pandemic is a basic challenge for Open Source work.
Unplugging and finding an end. Loneliness. Lack of the none-verbal part of
communication. Time zones. Language and cultural differences. Maintaining trust.

### Lack of capacity

Open Source projects often operate in precarious environments. It takes hard
work to come by the resources, time and people needed to succeed.

Finding new people to join the effort is not so easy. Contributor involvement
can stagnate and because of the free-form most communities take, the risk of
churn runs high. User/customer communities grow faster than contributor
communities.

If shit hits the fan, the popularity that your community worked so hard on to
achieve will turn against you.

Sometimes you have to work with (or against) groups that have way more
resources, like a way bigger community or even a business.

It happens a lot that Open Source Communities have to do the same, or even *way*
more, with less.

## Solutions

Phew, that was a lot of negative stuff....

![A kitten hanging in there](https://media.giphy.com/media/3ohc1cBc5pZXSgv8GI/giphy.gif)

But don't despair, there are fun and positive activities you can do to deal
with those problems. To prevent them from happening at all, to manage them if
they occur and to make them less stressful for your community.

### Prioritize The Most Vulnerable

Your community bond is only as strong as the most vulnerable link. Prioritize
safety of the people involved over organizational goals. That means your
community needs to be prepared to hold people accountable to safety even at
*grave* costs to itself.

Make sure your community has a strategy and tactics to identify and deal with abuse.

An effective implementation must be part of a learning process that requires
building shared understanding, *enforcement* and continuous improvement. One
aspect of this where you find people collaborating are [code of
conducts](https://www.contributor-covenant.org/).

### Build Awareness

It's like with bugs in your source code, identifying the exact problem is half
of the solution. It's important you are aware of community health. To understand
that you are not dealing with problems alone. It's important that more people
*in general* know about community health.

There's lots to learn from people who have experience. Many of them talk
about this in the open (like me here) and there are even whole Open Source
Communities about this topic. Like [sustainoss](https://sustainoss.org/).

Another approach to raise awareness is gathering and presenting data. The Linux
Foundation built an Open Source Community that is working hard on enabling
everyone to generate "health reports" for their own project: [The CHAOSS
project](https://chaoss.community/)

In general, everything you learn and experience you should also talk about to
your peers.

### Build Diversity

So, you just learned there are diversity issues with Open Source. Now what? We
suggest you read [this
document](https://github.com/sublimemarch/so-you-just-learned). Fostering
diversity through inclusion is it's own universe and you *need* to explore it.
Increased [Open Source Diversity](https://opensourcediversity.org/) will make
all of the problems less likely to occur and/or the solutions easier to
do.

### Build Clarity

When it comes to people working together, explicit trumps implicit every time.
Build an explicit culture and values to avoid misunderstandings about trajectory
and tactics of your community.

Your project documentation should clarify *what* you want to achieve. About the
steps you took, and plan to take to manifest the goal you set out to achieve.
What are the priorities? *Who* is the priority? In the short term, in the mid
term?

But also about how "power" and responsibility are distributed. How to join the
effort. The path to [leadership](https://sfosc.org/docs/book/governance/). What
about your community you *don't* want to change even if your momentum will allow
you to do so?

Make it easy for everyone to discover those aspects about your Open Source Community.

### Build Peer Support

People in Open Source Communities have a relationship of equality, they
can relate to each other. That means they are also in a position to offer
support to each other by: "been there, done that". What can your community
do to leverage that kind of support?

If your community is small (is it just you?) you have to seek for support
outside of it. Who do you know that has more experience with dealing with abuse,
conflict and burnout than you? Find a place where other Open Source Community
maintainers gather like [github maintainers](https://github.com/maintainers) or
[sustainoss](https://discourse.sustainoss.org/).

If your community is big enough mentoring probably comes natural to it. Usually
between an older more experienced member and a less experience one. Starts out
on technical grounds, will often instigate the development of companionship and
emotional support. Build a mentoring program to bring people together and foster
this.

Provide opportunities for peer listening. People in your community don't have to
brood alone in front of their screen about problems. Make sure people have the
opportunity to share experiences on a continuous, individual basis with each
other. This can take different forms: random coffee hangouts, open door meetings,
a private chat group, community 1:1s.

### Build Conflict Management

Humans are social animals, the world is full of groups of people collaborating.
In business, sports, hobbies or politics. And if you want collaboration
you have to accept and manage conflict.

A mountain of knowledge about this exists already. Make sure your Open Source
Community learns about the proposed strategy and tactics *before* the first
conflict in your group happens. Prepare for relationships going sour on an
interpersonal level, between factions in your community and with people outside
of your group. As diversity and inclusion, [conflict
management](https://opensource.com/life/16/5/conflict-resolution-primer) is it's
own world you need to explore.

Please keep in mind that authority, dominance, winning and loosing (zero sum)
isn't always the answer to conflict.

### Build Resiliance

Hard times make us, we come back stronger from them. To ensure that your Open
Source Community actually comes back from hardship, you have to build skills to
endure.

You can't do everything on your own, if your project consists of you and your
chewing gum then it might be thriving over the short term, mostly due to the
energy generated by your initial success of making it happen. But that same energy
will generate countless *other* opportunities for you. That same energy might be
sucked out of you by some nasty incident involving abuse or conflict. The new
job, the opportunity to go on a world trip or simply this book that changes how
you look at life might divert your energy elsewhere.

Make sure information and capabilities are shared among community members. Your
general priority needs to be attracting new contributors for the tasks that need
to be done, not only coding! Outsource as much as you can. It's fun and you are
certainly capable of running your own server hosting your projects
web/chat/source code management system. But does it contribute to your
communities goals?

Another way to gain access to people, resources and funds is to merge your
community into bigger one. There are tons of nonprofit
[organizations](https://opensource.com/resources/organizations) hosting
smaller communities and providing them with resources.

If you are prepared for doing this, get [money](https://opencollective.com) or
even business involved into your project. Monetary funds can help making your
community sustainable. But please be aware that money is "just" a thing you can
exchange for resources and the most sought out resource is people. A dollar bill
doesn't write code, triages issues or write a release blog post: People do.

The way to make an Open Source Community sustainable is to get [more
people](https://hennevogel.de/blog/free_people.html) involved.

## Enjoy and Prepare for the Worst

To maintain a sustainable Open Source Community of people is fun and terrible at
the same time. Enjoy the good times but *also* prepare yourself and your friends
for the bad parts please. Most important: Be mindful about it and stay healthy!
